SYNTH MUSIC
In Washington DC, a secret
project investigating
the wealth of the world's rich
and powerful is in full swing.
We are working with a team
of international reporters
to unravel a vast
network of companies
that hides the financial
affairs of corporations,
politicians, oligarchs
and criminals.
- What we're looking at here
is really a parallel universe,
where people can go
to play and avoid
the rules in their
own countries.
They can go to
offshore tax havens
and basically do things they
wouldn't be allowed
to do at home.
With the International
Consortium
of Investigative Journalists,
we got access to a
massive database
of documents from tax
havens around the world:
a stunning leak of
financial secrets
from a Panamanian law firm
called Mossack Fonseca.
We're looking at easily
the biggest leak
in history in terms of the size.
We're looking at more than
11 million documents.
And if you were to compare
it with sort of famous leaks
like the WikiLeaks State
Department records:
this is thousands of times
larger than that leak.
The documents reveal
in graphic detail
how Mossack Fonseca set
up more than 200,000
companies, foundations
and trusts
largely in tax havens.
- In this parallel universe
where people want secrecy,
they go to Mossack
Fonseca first.
Mossack Fonseca set
up the companies,
and then those
companies are used
to basically open
up bank accounts.
And therefore the real
owner of the bank account
becomes anonymised by the fact
that it's an offshore company
that technically owns the money.
-  Mossack Fonseca: they're the
engineers who put together
the wheels and the
machinery to make it work.
And they make sure that
it continues to work.
So they're very important.
And who is instructing them?
It's going to be
the corporations;
it's going to be the
representatives
of heads of state
who've stolen money;
it's going to be all
of the criminals
who want to hide money.
And as long as the firm is
not held to a standard
of serious due diligence
of who its customers are
and what they're up to,
they keep this system
rolling right along.
Mossack Fonseca services
a myriad of clients.
In the database are respected
global corporations
and world leaders who have
assets in offshore havens.
- The current prime minister
of Iceland is in there,
with a company with his wife.
We've got the current
president of the Ukraine.
king of Saudi Arabia.
And we've also got interesting
sort of asides like um,
David Cameron, the British prime
minister's, father's in there
and in a rather
embarrassing way,
because he clearly was making
a lot of money out of
the offshore world,
while his son is now campaigning
against tax havens.
It would seem almost impossible
that they didn't know
who this guy was.
They would had to have
known who he was.
-  There are also notorious
cronies and criminals
who used Mossack Fonseca
to secretly organise
their business around the world.
We discovered their
passports and
company records
buried in the files.
ROCK MUSIC
Among them: Rami Makhlouf,
billionaire cousin
of Syrian president
Bashar al-Assad
and a key financial
backer of the regime.
Marllory Chacon Rossell,
a queen of the Latin
American cocaine trade
before she was jailed in the US.
Sergei Roldugin, godfather
to the daughter
of Russian president
Vladimir Putin.
A cello player, but
the leaked files show
his offshore company receiving
millions of dollars
in suspicious loans.
Hugo Jinkis and
his son, Mariano,
two of the biggest sports
marketers in Latin America.
Both are charged in
the FIFA scandal
for allegedly conspiring to
solicit $150 million in bribes.
It is the corporate
use of this system
that protects the criminals
who use the same system.
The corporations say,
"Look, what we're doing
is perfectly legitimate.
After all, the OECD treaty
allows us to manoeuvre around,
to have these
subsidiaries, to move
the profits to
wherever we want."
The same system is the
system that criminals use
to hide the money
and to make sure
that they're not caught
and they have no
responsibility for
what they've done.
- We soon discovered hundreds
of Australian passports,
names and addresses in
Mossack Fonseca's files.
They include corporate
giant BHP Billiton
and some of our leading
foreign investors.
But we also uncovered convicted
fraudsters and tax evaders.
The Mossack Fonseca leak
escalates the heated debate
in Australia over tax avoidance.
- Let's not
pussyfoot around it.
What is the business model
of these tax havens?
Be it the Cayman Islands,
the British Virgins Islands,
be it Panama, the business
model is built around:
"We will allow you to engage
in practices for a small fee
that would otherwise be illegal
in your host country."
That's the business model.
We estimate that
there's at least
21 to 32 trillion dollars
of individual private
financial wealth offshore,
um, parked through havens.
That's just individual wealth;
that's not corporate money.
There's additional, you
know, trillions of dollars
of corporate money
that flows offshore
and is parked in low-tax
havens for tax purposes.
DRAMATIC SYNTH MUSIC
We've come to Panama
City in Central America
to investigate Mossack
Fonseca at its headquarters.
Given Panama's
colourful history,
it's not surprising
that a law firm here
has become a global leader
in the tax haven business.
This city is one of the oldest
tax havens in the world.
At the height of
the cocaine trade,
Panama was a money laundry
for the Latin
American drug lords.
And it offered the full service:
wash, rinse and spin dry.
These days, Panama
says, it's reformed.
GUITAR AND SINGING
Today many Panamanian
lawyers and bankers
get rich moving money
into tax havens.
It's not a crime.
But their business often moves
billions in tax revenue
out of the reach of
national governments.
- They're increasingly
using the best structures
on the planet and not
just Panama facilities,
but they're based in
Panama because there is
relatively strong financial
secrecy in Panama.
...and then they would wire
the money elsewhere...
- As James Henry from the Tax
Justice Network explains,
many wealthy individuals
and corporations
want a tax haven company to get
around the tax laws at home.
Well, usually we
refer to a tax haven
as a low-tax jurisdiction
compared to other places.
It's a place that,
where non-residents,
either companies or individuals,
um, can take advantage
of the fact
that they're not really
taxed on their income
or their capital gains
or their estates,
even though they have
planted companies there.
MUSIC
Even in Panama, Mossack Fonseca
stands out among
other law firms.
It's setting tax
up haven companies
on an industrial scale,
through its 30 offices
around the world.
Co-founder Jürgen Mossack is
an expert in Swiss tax law,
with a glamorous Cuban wife
and unlimited ambition.
My vision is that our company...
and its various divisions
become an organisation
that is really, really
not only well respected,
but which is an organisation
similar to, perhaps, Microsoft,
where people basically...
need us.
His partner, Ramon Fonseca,
is one of the best-connected
lawyers in Panama City.
Until recently he was a
special ministerial advisor
to the Panamanian president
and a top player in the
ruling political machine.
- Mr Fonseca is the president
of the governing party.
Mr Fonseca was an advisor to
the president and as such he
basically advises the president
in whatever he's requested to.
Is that an influential position?
Definitely he, you know, he
has the ear of the president.
Money laundering is a
big problem in Panama.
We are making corrections. We
are trying to restrict it.
But it's still dragging on.
There are still cases going on.
- The local head of the
anti-corruption body,
Transparency International,
says despite Mossack Fonseca's
political connections,
its operations are
coming under scrutiny.
- If you're going to continue
in this industry,
you know, you need
to know your client.
You need to make sure
your client is bona fide
and is doing exactly what he
tells you he's doing with this
and he's not using this company
for any criminal activity.
- Mossack Fonseca's files
reveal its clients
are under investigation
on four continents.
Its simple aim might
be to help people
and companies
minimise their tax,
but the leaked data
exposes a pattern
of covert financial
manoeuvrings.
- Mossack Fonseca
can help people avoid
the laws and the
regulations of countries
that have the capability
of collecting tax and
imposing liability.
And they are very
good at helping
people in that
offshore environment.
SLOW SYNTH MUSIC
One way Mossack Fonseca
helps its wealthy clients
is by hiding their identity
in so-called shell companies.
These companies hire
front men or nominees
as shareholders and directors,
so the real owner
of the assets never
appears on a company register.
- It depends on the game
that you're playing,
but ultimately you're trying
to avoid identification
of the ultimate beneficial owner
involved in these things,
so you can avoid liability.
Let's say someone borrows
money and defaults on it.
They want to escape
their creditors.
They don't want to know...
want you to be able to
track them down.
If they're dodging
taxes they're not
interested in the
IRS finding them.
So it's really a
game of, you know,
hide the peanut
under the shells.
And, um, that's a
major part of it.
EERIE SYNTH MUSIC
As we dug deeper into
Mossack Fonseca's files,
we found one network of
front men and women,
repeatedly used to hide
the identity of clients.
This network was not
based in Panama,
but on Queensland's Gold Coast.
The man behind it is Ian Taylor.
Ian Taylor is a
shady New Zealander
who moved to Australia
a decade ago.
His shell companies have been
embroiled in a series of
scandals, including allegations
of money laundering.
- Ian Taylor is one
of these people,
and there are many hundreds
of them in the data,
where they literally
rent their name
to pretend to be
directors of companies.
So if you want to have an
anonymous offshore company,
you'll need someone to be
your, basically your proxy.
So Ian Taylor will
be the director of
thousands of companies
around the world
and he won't have a clue
what any of those
companies are doing,
which again raises questions
about, you know, probity.
DRAMATIC MUSIC
We've come to Queensland's Gold
Coast in search of Ian Taylor.
We want to ask him why
he and his proxies
appear on hundreds of
tax haven companies
registered by Mossack Fonseca.
Taylor and his
former wife, Rachel,
were both listed as
directors at this address.
Doesn't look like there's anyone
home. We'll have to try again.
We tried other addresses
used by Taylor,
including this one
he currently lists
with the Australian
corporate regulator.
- Hello?
Oh, hi. I'm looking
for Ian Taylor.
Have I got the right building?
Oh, he doesn't live here.
He's not here.
Right. Ah, is Rachel
there at all?
No. She doesn't
live here at all.
OK. Thanks very
much for your help.
Taylor proved an
elusive character.
He keeps a low
profile here since
his New Zealand business hit
the news six years ago.
- Ian Taylor's Queensland office
is half a world away from a
cargo plane in Thailand,
seized last month with
35 tons of illegal arms
believed to be
destined for Iran.
But the complex paper
trail leads back
to a New Zealand-registered
company,
set up by this Kiwi businessman.
- Taylor and his
father's business
had registered a local company
with nominee directors
at was exposed organising
an arms shipment
from North Korea to Iran,
both countries under
UN arms sanctions.
After the initial shock
we went into I guess,
a mode of, of trying
to figure out
exactly where we stand
with everything.
- That really blew the lid on
the Taylor family enterprise.
It attracted a lot of
unwanted attention to them
and I believe that the
authorities in New Zealand
began to look at
their activities.
Major scandals involving
arms dealing,
um...
bank scandals involving
the laundering of money
for Mexican drug cartels
and other things.
DRAMATIC MUSIC
Our investigation uncovered
disturbing emails,
showing Mossack Fonseca
ignored warnings
about working with the Taylors.
The firm's executives
repeatedly backed the Taylors,
describing Ian's father
Geoffrey as a man of:
- High credibility, professional
history and moral standard.
We have been cooperating with
his company for many years.
Taylor finally agreed to meet me
at a pub in Surfers Paradise.
He admitted acting as a nominee
director and shareholder
on hundreds of tax
haven companies.
But he also claimed his passport
and identity had been stolen
and used to forge directorships
in eastern Europe.
He said he would explain
all in an interview,
but then stopped
taking our calls.
- Ian Taylor and the
family always say:
well, you can't blame
them for any of this,
because they don't know what
the companies are doing.
But they are actually
directors of these companies
and they do have some
sort of responsibility
to know what these
companies have been up to.
- Australian Federal Police
have recently questioned Taylor
on behalf of Romanian
authorities.
But Taylor and his
proxies can escape
legal responsibilities for
the companies they front,
because they operate
in the offshore world.
- What this really says is a
lot about the system itself
and how broke the system is
and how crazy the whole thing
is that you can do this.
I mean, you can have this
parallel universe and it exists.
And you've got all these
fake directors and all
these fake companies
and all this secrecy.
I think the Taylors are
just, you know, part of...
you know, of this
kind of crazy world.
HAUNTING MUSIC
- Mossack Fonseca uses
the offshore system
expertly for its top
corporate clients.
While what it does is
legal, in some cases
it raises serious
ethical questions.
Our investigation reveals
Mossack Fonseca helped conceal
the identities behind a major
Australian government
contractor.
Wilson Security, which guards
the Australian Tax Office,
the Defence Department and
Australia's offshore
detention centres,
uses the services
of Mossack Fonseca.
- You filming me?
- Yep
Do you have my permission?
- I think if a government
is going to outsource
such a delicate operation,
such as the detention
of men, women and children,
in an isolated place, away
from public scrutiny,
where the media is locked out,
where there is a
massive, um... lockdown
on information and transparency:
then at the very least,
some proper due diligence
on the backgrounds
of those people
being contracted should occur.
Wilson Security portrays itself
as an Australian operation.
But buried in Mossack
Fonseca's files we found this
courier envelope that
tells a different story.
It led us from Wilson's
accountants in Perth
to Wilson's ultimate
holding company,
in the British Virgin Islands.
DRAMATIC SYNTH MUSIC
- These places are not
kind to whistleblowers.
They're not kind to journalists.
They thrive on secrecy and
that's their bread and butter.
So I wouldn't expect a
warm red-carpet treatment
when I go to BVI.
Following the Wilson
trail to the BVI,
the British Virgin
Islands, is fraught.
This Caribbean tax haven
doesn't welcome reporters.
Indeed, we could
be jailed here for
publishing the Mossack
Fonseca documents.
We were forced to enter
the territory as tourists
when the authorities
refused us work permits.
Then we were stopped
at the border.
Well, that took almost
an hour because
I was on their
immigration stop list.
But we've gotten in.
We met up first
with Martin Kenney,
a top asset recovery lawyer
who knows this place
better than most.
- The British Virgin
Islands is a beautiful
archipelago of islands in
the eastern Caribbean Sea.
We have only 32,000 people here;
perhaps 2,000 beautiful
sailing boats,
the world's largest
sailboat charter fleet.
But we have far more companies
than people or boats:
500,000 by latest count,
representing about a quarter,
25 per cent of the
world's population
of offshore companies.
- That's about 15
offshore companies for
every man, woman and
child who lives here.
These companies don't
come here to invest:
they come because
it's a tax haven.
And in some cases,
they come to hide
their affairs from
public scrutiny.
- We have the same level
of confidentiality
as you would have in Australia,
or where I'm from in Canada
with the exception that we
don't have a public registry
of identifying the
names of directors
or registered shareholders -
or what's critically
important to a fraud lawyer:
the identity of the UBO, the
ultimate beneficial owner,
the real owner behind a
corporate structure.
DRAMATIC MUSIC
- This is the capital of the
British Virgin Islands.
Behind the main street is
the address on the envelope
for Wilson Security's
holding company.
It's the same address as Mossack
Fonseca's headquarters here.
- Wilson's corporate set-up,
Wilson Group corporate set-up
is extremely complicated.
It has got many dimensions.
It has got many layers.
And especially when you have
got that many dimensions
and that many layers and
it's not within one country,
but globally, it's
just complex beyond
what one can actually
say in words.
In Mossack Fonseca's
files we found the
original directors of
Wilson's holding company.
They include two
billionaire directors
from Hong Kong, Raymond
and Thomas Kwok.
In 2012 the Kwok
brothers, along with one
of their top executives,
were charged
in one of the biggest bribery
cases in Hong Kong's history.
- The charges hit as Wilson
Security in Australia
geared up to bid for
government contracts
worth hundreds of
millions of dollars.
Definitely it shocked people,
because the Kwok brothers
were very reputable
and, um, many Hong Kong citizens
used to look up to them.
They were charged
because of bribery.
But no one really knew which
one of the Kwok brothers
was actually behind this all.
- Within a week of the
charges, the Kwok brothers
resigned as directors of
Wilson's holding company
in the British Virgin Islands,
apparently cutting their
ties with Wilson Security.
But two mysterious companies
then appeared as the
new directors: Harmony
Core and Winsome Sky.
And we found behind
these companies
sat Raymond and Thomas Kwok.
They'd hidden their
directorships of the
company controlling
Wilson Security,
with the help of
Mossack Fonseca.
Financial secrecy is the
essential piece of business.
And the skills of the Panamanian
law firms are to figure out
how to set up a trust here
that owns a corporation there,
that owns another
corporation somewhere else;
and create a series of layers
that make it very difficult,
if not impossible, for an
investigator to figure out
who really owns what and
where the money is.
- Wilson Security's
Australian executives
would not be interviewed.
But in a statement
they sought to
distance the Kwoks
from the company.
- Raymond Kwok is not,
nor has he ever been,
a director of Wilson Security.
Thomas Kwok is not, nor at
any stage has he ever been,
a director of, nor has he
ever had any involvement in
any Wilson company's
operations in Australia.
DRAMATIC MUSIC
In December 2014
Thomas Kwok was jailed
for five years over the
Hong Kong bribery scandal.
His brother Raymond
was acquitted.
By then, Wilson Security had won
Australian government contracts
worth more than 400
million dollars,
including sensitive contracts
that are supposed to
require tough probity rules.
It seems ridiculous
to me that a company
that can take
hundreds of millions
of Australian taxpayer dollars,
in exchange for
locking up children,
doesn't require an
assessment of the character
of the individuals involved.
I mean, where else would
that be acceptable?
Well, this, this is a, a
fundamental question, which is:
why should the large countries
of the world accept as real,
entities that are set up on
a group of islands that has
fewer people by far than it
has offshore corporations,
and has no real legal
system to monitor
and police what these
entities are up to?
Um...
That is really the
heart of the problem.
And what governments
should be doing is saying,
"We will not accept as
real, these entities.
You have to come here. You
have to incorporate here.
You have to do it
under our rules
and that requires
full disclosure."
MUSIC
- While governments
insist they want
to clean up the offshore world,
the number of companies in
tax havens is exploding.
That has a real impact on our
economy and our tax system.
We only had to come down to the
famous Panama Canal to see that.
The company that operates
this crucial port
at the entrance to
the Panama Canal
is controlled by Hong
Kong's richest man.
And he, too, is a client of
Mossack Fonseca, here in Panama.
He also happens to be
one of the biggest
foreign investors
in Australia today.
He is 87-year-old Li Ka-shing.
His net fortune is estimated
at over 40 billion dollars
and we discovered his identity
card in Mossack Fonseca's files.
- Li Ka-shing, he's
the number-one
richest man in Hong Kong.
And he's very wealthy.
He's a very powerful
businessman in Asia
and he's best known for
his mobile business
in Hutchison Whampoa Limited,
which happens to be
one of the biggest
listing companies in Hong Kong,
um, but he also has
got a lot of assets
that he holds in infrastructure.
LAUGHING
In Australia, few people
know the name Li Ka-shing.
But if you live in Victoria
or South Australia
and you turn on your
lights at night,
you help Li Ka-shing stay at
the top of the rich list.
His company, Cheung
Kong Infrastructure,
has a big slice of Australia's
electricity market,
especially in South Australia.
This company is ubiquitous.
Everyone who turns
on the lights,
turns on an appliance in their
home, it's through this company.
They have a monopoly
on the distribution of
electricity into people's
homes and into factories,
into businesses
throughout the state.
It has a massive presence
in my home state.
That's all the more
reason that there
needs to be
transparency in this.
Li Ka-shing's company,
Cheung Kong Infrastructure
or CKI Holdings,
is listed on the Hong
Kong stock exchange
but it's incorporated in
the tax haven of Bermuda.
The leaked data shows
Cheung Kong Infrastructure
used Mossack Fonseca's
Hong Kong office
to organise a string of
related subsidiaries
in Panama and the
British Virgin Islands.
Internal emails show
the company insisted
on the utmost secrecy
for its affairs.
- Special instruction:
please do NOT display
and send any documents
from the client by email.
The client request
us to treat their
documents as the
high confidence.
The great irony here is
that here is a company
that effectively
provides light for
every South Australian
household,
but is not prepared to have the
light shone on its tax affairs.
PLANE OVERHEAD
Unravelling CKI's tax affairs,
even with the leaked data,
is virtually impossible.
But we do know the
Australian Tax Office took
two CKI-related companies
to court in 2013.
The Tax Office argued
each company owed
almost 400 million dollars
in back taxes and penalties
on their Australian
electricity business.
- That particular company had
blatantly, it appeared, ignored
its obligations under
the Tax Act to
lodge either returns
or documents,
or it had filed a
return that the
Tax Office was
dissatisfied with,
which appears to have been
the first year's return.
- We asked a former
senior official
with the Australian Tax
Office, , Martin Lock,
to explain the extraordinary
court ruling.
- Obviously in frustration
the Tax Office finally issued
assessments which the company
obviously didn't even act upon,
because the ATO had to
take this matter to court
to get a judgement debt
against the company.
In your experience, is
that pretty unusual
for a large corporation
to do that?
That's very unusual for a
large corporation to do that.
Um... that...
appears to show just blatant
disregard for the law:
a blatant non-compliance.
Li Ka-shing's companies
quietly settled the case
with the Australian
Tax Office last year,
for less than one tenth
of the original claim.
CKI executives refused to be
interviewed by Four Corners
about their tax
haven arrangements,
but issued a statement saying:
- All our companies
fully comply with
regulatory, tax and
legal requirements
of the countries
they operate in,
and Australia is no exception.
The Deputy Tax Commissioner
defends the settlement,
but laws on confidentiality
of corporate taxpayers
mean he can't discuss it.
- I'm really unable to
comment on anything
that wasn't on the
public record.
Settlements are very important
in the Australian tax system
because they allow us to
secure the right amount of tax
without having to go through
a whole court process.
To paraphrase Lewis Carroll:
this is a case of
curiouser and curiouser.
Here is a company which has
been subject
to a ruling of almost
800 million dollars
in back taxes, in
underpayment of taxes.
Then it was quietly settled
a year or two later
for a fraction of that:
something like 10 per cent
of the total amount
being sought.
What I think this
highlights is the need for
greater transparency
in these settlements.
SYNTH MUSIC
- In the British Virgin
Islands it's obvious
financial secrecy
is a big problem.
You only have to see the
rows of post office boxes
that line the back streets
to realise no company
actually keeps any significant
records in this tax haven.
It's just a letter drop.
And that makes it tough
for tax investigators.
The fact is that they don't
hold any information
because the companies running
through those havens,
they might run through them
but they don't leave
any information there.
So then you have to see
through these havens
to try and find out
what's really going on.
TRAFFIC
You can see why the authorities
didn't want us filming here.
Behind me is the
British Virgin Islands
headquarters of Mossack Fonseca.
In this modest building
they manage to act
as the registered
agent of literally
thousands of companies;
among them, some of the biggest
operators in Australia.
BHP Billiton has
used Mossack Fonseca
as its BVI agent for
companies linked to its
diamonds, steel and
aluminium businesses
and, most importantly,
its finance arms.
The files show five
BHP Billiton finance
companies were
registered in BVI,
moving billions of
dollars in loans through
the tax haven,
organised from London.
The company is a
UK tax resident...
The Deputy Tax
Commissioner won't
comment on BHP
Billiton specifically.
But he explains why
some multinationals put
their inter-company loans
through tax havens.
You loan money to
your Australian
company through a
low-tax jurisdiction.
You charge interest: that's
a deduction in Australia.
That amount of money would
have been subject to tax
at, say, 30 per
cent in Australia,
but it leaves the country
it may have a withholding
tax, say, of 10 per cent,
but when it gets to the tax
haven it may have a tax,
it may be taxed there
at, say, one per cent.
So your overall tax burden
becomes 11 per cent,
as opposed to 30 per cent.
That's essentially why you go
through what's
called a tax haven;
what we call low-tax
jurisdictions.
FOREBODING SYNTH MUSIC
- BHP Billiton executives
declined to be interviewed,
but in a statement they
strenuously denied
their BVI finance companies
were used to avoid tax.
- BHP Billiton does not engage
in aggressive tax planning.
Each of these companies
was, and continues to be,
resident in the UK for tax
purposes and therefore
subject to UK tax on
its worldwide income.
Consequently, any profits
made by these companies were
taxable in the UK at the
normal company tax rate.
- Tony Cudmore, President,
Corporate Affairs, BHP Billiton
- Jane Michie, head
of tax, BHP Billiton.
- BHP Billiton is extremely
sensitive about its tax affairs
following last year's
Senate tax inquiry.
- You don't have a marketing hub
in Singapore, do you? Or you do?
- Executives initially
stonewalled senators' questions
about a Tax Office
audit that claimed
the company had avoided
millions in tax by
using a so-called marketing
hub in Singapore.
- But it's a direct question.
Have you been issued
with a paper from the
Tax Office in relation
to this matter?
- We, we would prefer not to
answer that question, thank you.
- Well, I think
that actually the
community deserves to know.
I mean...
- It was unbelievable.
To have Australia's
largest taxpayer
come before a Senate inquiry
about tax minimisation
and not be able to present
basic information
about their own structure.
It's, it's, it's... it's,
it just shows the contempt
with which that committee
was being held at
that point in time.
- BHP Billiton emerged as one of
the better corporate taxpayers
in the Senate inquiry, compared
with foreign multinationals.
- ...30 per cent is our
effective tax rate...
- The senators'
controversial report
is due as early as this week.
- Are you serious? You've
come to this inquiry...
- Coinciding with the
Mossack Fonseca leak,
it's expected to reignite
public anger over tax avoidance
by corporations and
wealthy individuals.
Do you not know? Or
you're not telling us?
- I think that we've
reached a tipping point,
that people are
really mad as hell
and they don't want
to take it any more;
that this is an opportunity
to open this up.
And this issue won't go
away until there is a
fair rate of tax being
paid by these companies.
- I have no idea what
you're talking about...
- Oh come on...
- and...
- Frankly, to the
justification that's provided
by a lot of these
companies that:
"Well, we're technically
operating, we believe,
within the law, so
that makes it OK",
you know, I think we have to
call that for what that is,
and that's bullshit.
I mean, that is a
bullshit argument.
The reality is that
they are operating
in a very, very grey
area of the law.
You know, this isn't
a victimless act.
Every dollar that's
minimised is a dollar
that's not going to a school,
that's not going to a hospital,
that's not going to a service
that we require and need.
And yet these companies
are getting away with it
and we're letting them
get away with it.
- Public anger is
putting pressure
on the Australian Tax
Office to step up
the fight against tax avoidance.
And tonight Four Corners
can reveal tax officials
have got their hands on some of
the leaked Mossack Fonseca files
for its high-profile tax evasion
taskforce, Project Wickenby.
- Our analysis so far has
shown a number of people
who are either in our Wickenby
or our wealthy Australians
investigation programs,
have come up. So there is
some...
- Have come up in the
Mossack Fonseca data?
- Yes, they have. Yes.
People who are involved
in these sorts of
secret arrangements to evade
tax,
they need to consider their
position very carefully,
bearing in mind that
in recent years
46 people have been sent to jail
as part of the Wickenby Program.
It's clear that there's
a great groundswell of
resentment of these tax
evasion activities,
because we continually receive
information from informants.
We've received information
since, err,
the company you're referring
to on other companies.
And so the...
I don't think you
can rely on these
secret arrangements
being kept secret.
SLOW HAUNTING MUSIC
- Mossack Fonseca, once
renowned for its secrecy
in handling the affairs
of the rich and powerful,
now finds itself on a
very public stage.
We're here outside
the Panamanian
headquarters of Mossack Fonseca
and here with media from
all over the world,
who are demanding answers
to their questions.
So far, we haven't got any.
CHATTERING
Tell him that a group
of around 20 or 25
international journalists is
in front of your building.
- The firm's response to
this unprecedented exposé
was to send out its PR man.
- Our detailed questions
were never answered.
But Mossack Fonseca denies
it ever acted illegally.
- We follow both the letter
and spirit of the law.
Because we do, we have not once
in nearly 40 years of operation
been charged with
criminal wrongdoing.
BASS GUITAR
That Mossack Fonseca
has never been charged
speaks volumes about what
is legal and acceptable
in the global world
of tax havens.
Turning a bright public
spotlight on that world,
many believe, is the
only way to achieve
a fairer and cleaner
financial system.
There's really
only one solution,
and that's to change the laws.
The Parliament has
to change the laws
if it wants a particular result.
It can't rely on
concepts of fairness
to come into the
thinking of the courts.
- Will you bring Mr
Mossack and Mr Fonseca...
- Appeals to, you know, the
corporate, social conscience
of paying their
fair share, well,
they can legitimately say,
"We're paying what we are
required to pay under the law.
And if that's not fair by your
standards, change your laws."
MUSIC
- People have realised
that they are
the people getting
ripped off here:
that if you're not
wealthy enough
or you're not rich enough,
you're not big enough
or you're not powerful
enough to structure
your tax affairs in such a way,
then you have to pay tax.
People are angry.
People have had enough.
People are fed up and
the political system
needs to catch up with
that and actually
make some tougher laws
that will address it.